msbuild overview doc (#7005)
dotnet/msbuild: documentation/wiki/MSBuild-overview.md

- [Quick intro](#quick-intro)
- [Language interpretation parts](#language-interpretation-parts)
- [MSBuild APIs and components](#msbuild-apis-and-components)
- [MSBuild execution modes](#msbuild-execution-modes)

# Quick intro
MSBuild implements an actual language (... MSBuildian?). For syntax it uses XML. The XML elements and attributes represent keywords, variable names, and expressions in the language. The language is interpreted.

MSBuild has two data structures:
- [properties](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-properties): single valued, scalars. Like `string foo` in C#

> - [items](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-items): multi valued, vectors. Like `string[] foo` in C#.

Reviewer: Not really like a string arrays because they can have metadata

Author: True, but my intent was to keep this is as a big overview that gives one the "feel of the landscape", not an exhaustive specification. I'll describe this intent in the introduction. There's also the hyperlink to the VS docs with all the details.

Reviewer: IMHO this is a core concept -- if you don't want to mention it here I'd avoid analogizing with `string[]` as it's misleading.

Author: The main aspect I wanted to convey was that: "there's two types, one that represents a single thing, and another that's a list of things". Maybe `object foo` and `object[] foo`? :) Or maybe `ItemType[] foo` where `ItemType` is `{string ItemValue, Dict<string, string> Metadata}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [items](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-items): multi valued, vectors. A little `string[] foo` in C#, except the array has a name called an item-type, and each item may not only have a value, but also have associated key-value pairs known as metadata.
```
?

Typewise, everything is a string in MSBuild.

> Executing logic is grouped in [Targets](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-targets). They are like functions in C#. Targets can contain a single type of statement, [Tasks](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/msbuild/msbuild-tasks). Targets form dependencies between themselves and are executed via a stack, similar to stack based function execution in other languages.

Reviewer: Worth noting they can never run twice

Author: That would require explaining global properties and what a target's identity really is (tuple of file path, global props, toolsversion). Probably too much for a quick overview?

Reviewer: fair enough.

Evaluation does not execute the targets in a project. It only interprets and stores the results of logic outside targets.

The second phase of msbuild interpretation is target execution. This happens in the [TargetBuilder](https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/blob/bd00d6cba24d41efd6f54699c3fdbefb9f5034a1/src/Build/BackEnd/Components/RequestBuilder/TargetBuilder.cs#L100). The `TargetBuilder` uses a stack to execute targets. The initial state is the state contained inside a given `ProjectInstance`. So targets execute in a stack based manner and mutate the global state inside a `ProjectInstance`.

> What's the difference between `Project` and `ProjectInstance`? Sad story, but they are duplicates. `Project` objects are specialized in introspecting / analyzing MSBuild code and also in providing high level project editing operations. `ProjectInstance` objects are  read only. So the objects in the `Project` tree point back to their corresponding `ProjectRootElement` AST elements. The objects in the `ProjectInstance` tree do not point back to the `ProjectRootElement` elements (so they have a much smaller memory footprint). For example, the `Project` tree is used by Visual Studio to analyze msbuild projects, and to reflect UI changes all the way down to the XML elements. The `TargetBuilder` only works with the lighter weight `ProjectInstance` tree, since it only needs to read state.

Reviewer: Sad story? 🙃 they're intended for design time (eg solution explorer) and build time (eg command line)

Author: The use cases are indeed legitimate, but the actual implementation involves a lot of duplicated code, with all its downsides, hence the "sad story".  :)

Reviewer: that's not going to be clear -- I would change "sad story they are duplicates" with "they are for scenarios X and Y respectively"

    - MSBuild is responsible for discovering project dependencies, and building them in a depth first search manner
    - There is no static graph of project dependencies. MSBuild does not know ahead of time what work it needs to do. It does a Just In Time DFS descent over the project references.
    - references form a DAG. A -> {B, C}, B -> {C, D}
    - there's a convention on how to declare and build references
      - documented here: https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/blob/main/documentation/ProjectReference-Protocol.md
      - mostly implemented here: https://github.com/dotnet/msbuild/blob/main/src/Tasks/Microsoft.Common.CurrentVersion.targets
- Building from Visual Studio (VS) (pressing ctrl+shift+B, or the context menu `Build -> Build Solution`)
    - VS implements an object model for an MSBuild dependency graph
    - VS takes over the responsibility of handling the graph dependencies and constructs its own graph
    - It bypasses MSBuild's scheduler and "orders" MSBuild to build a single project at a time, ignoring its references
    - It builds the graph bottom up in reverse toposort order (starting from nodes without references and going up).

>     - Fast up to date checks:  VS hardcodes relevant project file inputs for each language SDK. (for example it knows that C# projects read global.json). It uses these hardcoded rules to skip building projects. (whereas quickbuild does this in a generic non hardcoded way by observing actual IO inputs and outputs)

Reviewer 2: It's not that VS has hardcoded logic. It's that VS ran the evaluation step described above at some earlier time, so knows those files advertised by the project as being build inputs and outputs. This allows VS to more quickly scan those timestamps and skip calling MSBuild when no build is needed.

Author: That's true, but the VS rules on what inputs to extract from a project evaluation are still hardcoded rules (for example: look at @(Compile), look at @(Content), look at global.json, etc). During actual runtime, msbuild tasks may read file inputs not covered by the VS rules (leading to underbuilds, a correctness issue), or may read less file inputs than the VS rules (leading to overbuilds, wasted time). At best, VS can only play catch-up with what happens at runtime. This is opposed to a monitored build runtime that captures the concrete IO that's performed, thus being accurate by definition (or at least as good as the monitoring APIs).
